Code search turned code checker (#1618)
sourcegraph/about: blogposts/2020/code-search-turned-code-checker.md

we're always bound to make.

Starting small, the solution could look like a search query that finds issues in
active and popular Go projects at just the push of a button. Why not start
there?

[🔘 Run the entire code check query on popular Go code projects ↗](TODO)

### Proposing changes

The most exciting part about finding real hits with any code checking tool is
that we discover an _actionable_ way to improve the code! I've to narrowed down
the search query above so that it (hopefully) finds only real and
uncontroversial patterns to improve and contribute to active Go projects.

Part of an effective contribution means that we need to avoid matches in files
that are tests, vendored, or external dependencies. While anyone can use the
results to make contributions, it's important to be mindful of contributor
guidelines, clearly communicate and motivate proposed changes in pull requests,
validate that the change passes a project's tests or CI checks. And, while the
query does exclude common test and vendored files, it's best to check that
matches occur in files that really are part of the project.

If you're interested in potentially turning these results into open source

> contributions, e-mail me at <rijnard@sourcegraph.com>, I can help.

Author: This is an idea and still open-ended :-) Will tag and run it by Beyang and others when the post is in a more complete draft mode.

---
title: Code search turned static code checker
author: Rijnard van Tonder
authorUrl: https://twitter.com/rvtond
publishDate: 2020-09-30T14:00-07:00
tags: [blog]
slug: code-search-turned-code-checker
heroImage: /blog/XXX.png
published: true
---

<style>
  .gatsby-highlight {
    max-width: 100%;
    width: 40rem;
    margin-left: auto;
    margin-right: auto;
  }
  table {
    width: 40rem;
    border: none;
  }
    table th {
    border: none;
  }
  table td {
    border: none;
  }
  table td:nth-child(2n) {
      text-align: right;
  }
    table th:nth-child(2n) {
      text-align: right;
  }
  table tr:nth-child(2n) {
    background-color: transparent;
  }
</style>

I find static code checkers most valuable when they help teach me better ways to
code in a language or framework. For example, the Go
[staticcheck](https://staticcheck.io/docs/checks#SA6005) tool finds expensive
string comparisons like:

```go
if strings.ToLower(string1) == strings.ToLower(string2) {
  ...
}
```

and suggests instead:

```go
if strings.EqualFold(string1, string2) {
  ...
}
```

> I find these short-and-sweet replacements are a great way to learn framework

Reviewer: **Nit**: avoid the repetition of leading with "I find" in the first two paragraphs (it doesn't add much here).

```suggestion
These short-and-sweet replacements are a great way to learn framework
```

idioms or library functions, like `strings.EqualFold` in Go.<sup>1</sup> As a
codebase grows, these small inefficiences, inconsistencies, and missed
opportunities compound. Code patterns creep in that affect readability and
performance—[and it matters](https://www.digitalocean.com/blog/how-to-efficiently-compare-strings-in-go/?).

## Productivity workflows: Code checks vs. code search

Code checkers like `staticcheck` typically integrate with continuous integration
(CI) pipelines, or maybe a pre-commit hook in your development environment.
Others, like lint checks, typically integrate with editors. These workflows need
some upfront configuration, the code checks are fixed in place, and productivity
ensues (🤞).

A code search can also find code snippets to replace with functions like
`EqualFold`. In practice though, search engines generally treat code as
plaintext, and can't offer the fidelity of dedicated code checkers. Code
checkers do more work to gather static information of programs, e.g., parsing
syntax into trees and using build outputs like types and dependency graphs. It

> takes time to gather this info, it takes knowledge to write checks that use this
> info, and it takes time to hook it into your workflow. These constraints take away the

Reviewer: **nit**: refactored to not use abbreviated "info", avoid duplication, and clarify that what takes time is hooking the checks into your workflow (not the information). I find that this flows better. Hopefully for the latter that was the original intent.

```suggestion
takes time to gather this information, it takes knowledge to write checks that use it,
and it takes time to hook these checks into your workflow. These constraints take away the
```

flexibility and speed of search workflows when you're simply looking for changes
to your favorite

> `BananaNutChocolateCake Provider`[↗](https://sourcegraph.com/search?q=BananaNutChocolateCake&patternType=literal).

Author: It worked before :'( I didn't create an easter egg, just found it in the wild. I can only guess the repo is gone because I tried ways to get that result again (`index:no`). Guess I'll have to settle for `ChocolateCake`.

> And yet, I can't shake the idea that there's a middle ground between crude

Reviewer 2: To me, this intro leaves out a huge advantage of search over staticcheck, which is scalability. With search+comby, you can execute your find-replace over the entire universe of code, whereas staticcheck requires manual setup/effort for each repository you want to cover. This difference in scale/automaticness means if I'm someone who added a new API, I would totally reach for search+comby to update existing usages of that API to take advantage of my new function. Not as easy with staticcheck, because other repository maintainers have to set it up first. Big difference in friction.

Author: I agree. I want this post to be more of a deep-dive and examples of existing checks (I do get into the 'universe of code' bit more clearly in the intro now). The scenario of a custom API is great and I get into that a bit later, but it's difficult tie that benefit into this idea of code checks in the intro.

learned about could be reduced to a simpler and comparably effective _search query_?
Could we find, and maybe eradicate, all the code that should be calling
`EqualFold` instead? And without needing to clone the repos or set up a
fully fledged code checker? And so sprung the idea to explore code checking with
the ease of a flexible, push-button search workflow.

## Pushing code search toward static code checking

Earlier this year Sourcegraph introduced [structural search](blog/going-beyond-regular-expressions-with-structural-code-search/)
to search over code syntax. Structural search uses [comby](https://comby.dev) to implement
a basic building block in traditional code checkers: it interprets programs as
concrete syntax trees, not just plaintext. Sourcegraph search queries now also support patterns with
`or` clauses to search for multiple patterns. Add some file filters, and
it's becomes possible to write configurable code checks as self-contained search queries.
Let's explore this idea!

Here's a search query inspired by
[a check](https://staticcheck.io/docs/checks#S1003) where `strings.Index`
comparisons can be replaced with `strings.Contains`:

```python
language:go

> -file:test

Author: why not

-file:vendor

strings.Index(..., ...) > -1

or

strings.Index(..., ...) >= 0

or

strings.Index(..., ...) != -1
```

This query matches all `.go` files, excluding file paths that contain
`test` or `vendor`. It's sensible to exclude `test` and `vendor` paths if we
want to actually propose changes to a project (more on that later). The
patterns `strings.Index(..., ....)` match syntax of `strings.Index` calls,
and the `...` ellipses are special placeholders that match at least two
arguments.<sup>2</sup> The `or` keywords separate the patterns into separate
expressions.

We created a set of the top 100 Go repositories on GitHub (by stars) on
Sourcegraph.com. We can search those by adding `repogroup:go-gh-100` to
the query. Have a look at some of the results:

[🔘 Find ways to improve code in popular Go projects ↗](https://sourcegraph.com/search/console?q=repogroup:go-gh-100%0Alanguage:go%0A-file:test%0A-file:vendor%0A-file:Godeps%0A%0Astrings.Index(...,%20...)%20%3E%20-1%0A%0Aor%0A%0Astrings.Index(...,%20...)%20%3E=%200%0A%0Aor%0A%0Astrings.Index(...,%20...)%20!=%20-1)
<br />

> <sup>Side note: our multiline query editor is in a proof-of-concept phase.</sup>

Author: It only existed as of about a ~week ago so, you're not late ;)

[🔘 Example query to match known patterns in test files↗](https://sourcegraph.com/search/console?q=repo:%5Egithub%5C.com/dominikh/go-tools$%20%0Alang:go%0Afile:test%0A%0Astrings.IndexRune(...,%20...)%20%3E%20-1%0A%0Aor%0A%0Astrings.IndexRune(...,%20...)%20%3E=%200%0A%0Aor%0A%0Astrings.IndexRune(...,%20...)%20!=%20-1%0A%0Aor%0A%0Astrings.IndexRune(...,%20...)%20==%20-1%0A%0Aor%0A%0Astrings.IndexRune(...,%20...)%20%3C%200%0A%0Aor%0A%0Astrings.IndexAny(...,%20...)%20%3E%20-1%0A%0Aor%0A%0Astrings.IndexAny(...,%20...)%20%3E=%200%0A%0Aor%0A%0Astrings.IndexAny(...,%20...)%20!=%20-1%0A%0Aor%0A%0Astrings.IndexAny(...,%20...)%20==%20-1%0A%0Aor%0A%0Astrings.IndexAny(...,%20...)%20%3C%200%0A%0Aor%0A%0Astrings.Index(...,%20...)%20%3E%20-1%0A%0Aor%0A%0Astrings.Index(...,%20...)%20%3E=%200%0A%0Aor%0A%0Astrings.Index(...,%20...)%20!=%20-1%0A%0Aor%0A%0Astrings.Index(...,%20...)%20==%20-1%0A%0Aor%0A%0Astrings.Index(...,%20...)%20%3C%200%0A)

Using the test files isn't a guarantee that I've implemented all the checks or
that it's entirely precise, but it adds a lot more confidence than inferring
patterns only from documentation.

> ### Results

Reviewer 2: I think it would be interesting to show a small table comparing the definitions of these checks in `staticcheck` (presumably long/complex) vs. comby.

Without making any claims about completeness, I was able to implement

> at least one variant for 19 out of 34 checks checks that I feel confident

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
at least one variant for 19 out of 34 checks that I feel confident
```

about. I relied only on patterns in `staticcheck`'s test data to discover syntactic
variants for checks, so I don't know if I covered all the patterns that
`staticcheck` implements in its code.

The majority of checks that I couldn't write required type information to
implement correctly (13 of 34). Other checks I couldn't write required more
complex syntax matching rules (8 of 34). This table roughly quantifies the
expressive needs for implementing checks:

| Description                      | # of checks |
|----------------------------------|-------------|
| Total                            | 34          |
| Works (all variants)             | 11          |
| Works (at least one variant)     | 19          |
| Needs additional syntax matching | 8           |
| Needs type info                  | 13          |

> <sup>Note that some checks require type info _and_ additional syntax matching.
> Also, one working variant for a check may not require type info, but another
> variant for the same check may. I.e., the values overlap and do not sum to
> Total.</sup>

Reviewer: **nit**: since the previous and next paragraphs use "information" over "info", use it here as well for consistency. Re: may/may not, I find that starting with the affirmative flows better.

```suggestion
<sup>Note that some checks require type information _and_ additional syntax matching.
Additionally, one working variant for a check may require type information, while another
variant for the same check may not. I.e., the values overlap and do not sum to
Total.</sup>
```

Extending search queries to access static properties like type information is a
natural extension for writing better code checks, and an area of [code intelligence](https://docs.sourcegraph.com/user/code_intelligence)
work that we're exploring.

It was tempting to compare more directly with `staticcheck` output by
downloading the 100 Go repositories to disk, and running `staticcheck` on them
to see how the same patterns are found. For `staticcheck` to be effective, the
project typically needs to be built first (my experience was that running
`staticcheck` on individual files can be hit-and-miss, and understandably so). I

> didn't like the idea of doing all that work, so I punted. It does nicely motivate
> why less precise, but quicker code check workflows appeal.<sup>5</sup>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
didn't like the idea of doing all that work, so I punted. This further highlighted
the appeal of quicker, but less precise code check workflows.<sup>5</sup>
```

### Takeaway

> Code search can be much more than finding your favorite provider called

Reviewer 2: Maybe a table showing relative advantages/disadvantages of staticcheck vs seach+comby would be evocative here.

Potential rows:
* Accuracy (syntax vs semantics)
* Scalability
* Ease of definition
* Ease of execution

Author: I like this idea in principle (thanks for suggesting it), but I feel like all of these bullets needs to be better qualified to make a valid point, and anything short of that becomes handwavy. Example:

Ease of definition: this depends a lot on who writes the definition, and who uses it. A user of staticcheck doesn't really care how easy/hard it is to define checks in that framework. Sure it's nice that they can define their own with search, but they may not be able to think of anything off the top of their mind (much nicer if someone just does the thinking for you and you push a button), so the perceived benefit to a casual user is a bit moot unless we dig into it.

If we do make have a qualified discussion, I think it detracts from a simpler takeaway ("here's an example, see this can work instead?") that applies to the audience broadly, not just people who are familiar with scalability

<br />

> <sup>Side note: patterns run in order and results return early after finding "enough" matches.</sup>

Reviewer: As a reader, I find myself wanting to know what "enough" means here.

> contributions, e-mail me at <rijnard@sourcegraph.com>, I can help.

Author: @beyang I mentioned before this idea of "help people make OSS contributions using search results", and I've narrowed down the scope of search hits that I think we would be in a good position to do that. This section of the post is open-ended, i.e., I'm fine with people reaching out to me individually, but the other way that might work better is if we had a slack channel people could join (do we still have something like that)? How do you feel about this idea generally?

Reviewer 2: I am in favor of this idea. It would be a great way to engage new users. I do not know if there is a way to enable a private Slack like ours have a public channel that anyone can join. Creating a separate community Slack channel poses the question of whether or not this would be visible enough to members of the engineering team.

What would be ideal is if we could enable anyone to join a community channel without approval, that channel is visible to members of the team, and we can restrict visibility of more sensitive channels to only Sourcegraph teammates.

Author: Didn't Sourcegraph have a kind of community slack in the past? Otherwise maybe we can just make a new one, like sourcegraph-community or something and link to our internal one, like support channels. @dadlerj any thoughts on this?

Author: I don't have a clear sense how to do this with slack, we can figure it out post publishing if it makes sense, for now people can just email me and/or I will advertise it on twitter.
